- Hey, Richie, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Hi, Michael, thanks for having me.
Great to be here.
- Yeah, it's good to have you here.
I feel like maybe I should rename my podcast,
Talk Rust to Me or something.
I don't know, Rust is taking over
as the low level part of,
how do we make Python go fast?
I don't know, there's some kind of synergy with Rust.
What's going on there?
Yeah, there is. So I'd say Python already was low-level languages that succeeded, that
made Python a success. I mean, like NumPy, Pandas, everything that was reasonable fast
was so because of C, or Cyton, which is also C. But Rust, different from C, Rust has made
level programming a lot more fun to use and a lot more safe.
And especially if you regard multi-threaded programming,
parallel programming, concurrent programming,
it is a lot easier in Rust.
And it's way-- yeah.
So it opens a lot of possibilities.
Yeah, my understanding, I've only
given a cursory look to Rust, just sort of scan some examples.
And we're going to see some examples of code
in a little bit, actually, related to Polars.
But it's kind of a low-level language.
It's not as simple as Python or maybe a JavaScript.
But it is easier than C, C++, not just in the syntax.
But it does better memory tracking for you
and the concurrency especially, right?
Yeah, well, so Rust has got a, brings a whole new thing to the table, which is called ownership
and a borrower checker. And Rust is really strict. There are things in Rust you cannot do in C or C++
because at a time there can only be one owner of a piece of memory and other people can,
you can lend out this piece of memory to other users, but then they cannot mutate it. So,
So there can be only one owner which is able to mutate something.
And this restriction makes Rust a really hard language to learn.
But once you, once it's clicked, once you went over that steep learning curve,
it becomes a lot easier because it doesn't allow you things that you could do in C and C++.
But those things were also things you shouldn't do in C and C++ because they probably led to
to set faults and to memory issues.
And this borrow checker
also makes writing concurrent programming safe.
And sorry, you're muted.
- I am, thank you.
You can have many threads reading a variable all they want.
They can read concurrently.
It's when you have writers and readers
that this whole thread safety critical section,
take your locks or the locks re-enter and all of that really difficult stuff comes in.
And so, yeah, it sounds like an important key to making that.
Yeah, and the same borrower checker also knows when memory has to be freed and not.
But it doesn't have to, unlike in Go or Java where you have a garbage collector, it doesn't
have to do garbage collection and it doesn't have to do reference counting like Python
does.
by just statically. So at compile time, it knows when something is out of scope and not used anymore.
And this is real powerful.
Yeah. So I guess the takeaway for listeners who are wondering, you know, why is Rust seemingly
taking over so much of the job that C and variations of C, right? Like you said,
Cython have traditionally played in Python. It's easier to write modern, faster, safer code.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Probably more fun too, right? Yeah, definitely. And it's a language which has
got its tools right. So it's got a package manager, which is really great to use. It's got a real
creates.io, which is similar to the PyPy index. It feels like a modern language to build
low level, more low level code. You can also write high level stuff like
REST APIs, which is, I must say, also for high-level stuff, I like to write it in ROS
because of the safety guarantees and also the correctness guarantees. If my program compiles
in ROS, I'm much more certain it is correct than when I write my Python program, which is dynamic
and types are not enforced, so it's always a bit graying on that side. Python is great to use, but
it's harder to write correct code in Python.
Yeah, and you can optionally write very loose code,
or you could opt in to things like type hints and even
mypy, and then you get closer to the static languages, right?
Are you a fan of Python typing?
Definitely, but because they're optional,
they are as strong as the weakest link.
So one library which you use, if it
doesn't do this type correct or it doesn't do it, it breaks. It's
quite brittle because it's optional. I hope we get something that really
enforces it and really can check it. I don't know if it's possible because of
the dynamic nature of Python. Python can do so many things just dynamically and
statically. We just cannot know probably. I don't know how far it can go.
But I, yeah, in Polaris as well, we use mypy type ints, which prevent us from having a
lot of bugs and also make the IDE experience much nicer.
Yeah, type ints are great.
They really help you also think about your library.
I think you really see a shift in modern Python and Python 10 years ago, where it was more
dynamic and dynamic, the dynamic dynamic, I'm probably, Python were more seen as a strength
than than currently, I believe. Yeah, I totally agree. And I feel like when type hints first
came out, you know, this was, I guess, wow, at this point, kind of early Python three,
but it didn't feel like it at the time, you know, Python three had been out for quite a while.
when type hints were introduced, I feel like that was Python 3.4. But anyway, that was,
put it maybe six years into the life cycle of Python 3. But still, I feel like a lot of people
were suspicious of that at the moment. You know, they're like, Oh, what is this weird thing? We're
not really sure we want to put these types into our Python. And now a lot less. There's a lot
less of those reactions. Yeah, yeah, I see Python having to, probably more, but I often see Python
and that's the really fun, nice to use,
Duck Tape language where I can,
in my, for instance, in Jupyter Notebook,
I can just hack away and try interactively what happens.
And for such code, type ints don't matter.
But once I write more of a library or product or tool,
then type ints are really great.
I believe they came about, the Dropbox really needed them.
They had a huge Python code base
and I had really trouble maintaining it
without the Pythons, but I'm not really sure.
- Yeah, and I heard some guy who has something
to do with Python used to work there.
Guido used to work there, I think even at that time.
All right, so a bit of a diversion
from how I often start the show.
So let's just circle back real quick and get your story.
How'd you get into programming and Python
and Rust as well, I suppose?
- I got into programming by,
I just wanted to learn programming.
A friend of mine who programmed a lot of PHP
said, "Learn Python, you'll like that more."
And he gave me an interactive website
where I could do some puzzles,
and I really got hooked to it.
It was a fun summer.
I was programming a lot.
I started automating.
My job was a civil engineer at the moment,
and I started, there was a lot of mundane tasks
which were repetitive, and I just...
I found ways to automate my job and eventually I was doing that for a year or three, four,
and then I got into data science and I switched jobs.
I became a data scientist and later a data engineer.
Yeah, so that was Python mostly.
And I've always been looking for more languages.
languages, the playing with Haskell, the playing with Go, the playing with JavaScript,
I'll just look at it. The playing with Scala and then I found Rust and Rust really
really made me happy, like you learn a lot about how computers work.
I had a new renaissance of the first experience with Python, another summer
and I've been doing a lot of toy projects,
like writing an interpreter.
I don't know, a lot of projects.
And Polar became one of those hobby projects
just to use Raspbob.
>>Now it's got quite the following,
and we're going to definitely dive into that.
But let me pull it up.
It says right here, 13,000 GitHub stars.
That's a good number of people using that project.
That's pretty crazy, isn't it?
- Yeah, it is.
It is.
It's on GitHub stars,
it's the fastest growing data tool, I believe.
- Wow, incredible.
- Yeah.
- You must be really proud of that.
- Yeah, yeah.
If you would have told me this two years ago,
I wouldn't have believed it,
but it happens slow enough so you can get accustomed to that.
Yeah, that's cool.
Kind of like being a parent.
The challenges of the kids are small.
They're intense, but there are only a few things
they need when they're small, and you kind of grow with it.
So a couple of thoughts.
One, you had the inverse style of learning to program
that I think a lot of computer science people do,
and certainly that I did.
It could also just be that I learned it a long time ago.
But when I learned programming, it was,
I'm gonna learn C and C++.
And then you're kind of allowed to learn
the easier languages, but you will learn your pointers.
You'll have your void star star, and you're gonna like it.
You're gonna understand what a pointer to a pointer means.
And we're gonna get, I mean, you know,
you start inside and you, of the most complex,
closest to the machine, you work your way out.
You kind of took this opposite, like,
let me learn Python where it's much more high level
it's much, you know, if you choose to be often stay very much more away from the hardware and
the ideas of memories and threads and all that. And then you went to Rust. So was it kind of an
intense experience? You're like, oh my gosh, this is intense. Or had you studied enough languages by
then to become comfortable? Well, yeah, no. So the going from high level to low level, I think
makes natural sense if you learn it yourself. There's no professor telling me you learn your
pointers. So, I think this also helps a lot because at that point you're really accustomed
to programming, to algorithms. So, I believe you should learn one thing, one new thing at a time,
and then you can really own that knowledge later on.
But Rust...
I wouldn't say you should learn Rust as a first language.
It would be really terrible, because you need...
That would be terrible.
But other languages also don't help you much.
Because the borrow checker is quite unique.
It doesn't let you do things you can do in other languages.
what you learned there, the languages that allow you to do that, they just hurt you.
Because you were...
They encourage the wrong behavior, right?
Yeah. So, nine out of ten times, it turns out by compiling and not letting you do that one thing,
that one thing you wanted was probably really bad to begin with.
Laptop rarely... So in Rust your code is always a lot flatter.
It's always really clear who owns the memory, how deep your nesting is.
It's always one D deeper. Most of the times it's not that complicated.
You make things really flat and really easy to reason about.
And in the beginning of a project it seems okay, a bit over-constraining.
But when I mean software will become complex and complicated,
and then you're happy that the compiler not doing this.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> In this direction.
>> It seems like a better way, honestly.
You get a sense of programming in a more simple language that
doesn't ask so many low-level concepts of you,
and then you can add on these new ones.
I feel like a lot of how we teach programming,
and how people learn programming is a little bit backwards,
to be honest.
Anyway, enough on that.
So you were a civil engineer for a while,
and then you became a data scientist
and now you've created this library.
Still working as a data scientist now?
- No, no.
I got sponsored two years ago for two days a week.
And yeah, just use the time to develop Polar.
And currently I stopped all my day jobs
and I'm going full-time on other side
trying to live from sponsorships,
which is not really working.
It's not enough at this time,
but I hope to start a foundation
and get some proper sponsors in.
- Yeah, that'd be great.
That's awesome.
It's still awesome that you're able to do that
even if you still needed to grow a little bit.
Yeah, we'll have you on a podcast
and let other people know out there
who maybe are using your library.
Maybe they could put a little sponsorship
in GitHub sponsors.
I feel like GitHub sponsors
really made it a lot easier for people to support.
'Cause there used to be like PayPal donate buttons
and other things like that.
And one, those are not really recurring.
And two, you've got to go find some place
and put your credit card.
Many of us already have a credit card
registered at GitHub.
It's just a matter of checking the box
and monthly it'll just go.
You know, it's kind of like the app store
versus buying independent apps.
It just cuts down a lot of friction.
I feel like it's been really positive
mostly for open source.
- Yeah, I think it's good as a way to say thank you.
It isn't enough to pay the bills.
I think for most developers it isn't,
but I hope we get there.
companies who use it should give a bit more back. I mean, they have a lot of money.
I agree. It's really, really ridiculous that there are banks and VC funded companies and
things like that, that have, not necessarily in terms of the VC ones, but definitely in terms of
financial and other large companies that make billions and billions of dollars in profit on
on top of open source technology.
And many of them don't give anything back,
which is, I don't know, it's not criminal
because the licenses allow it,
but it's certainly borders on immoral to say,
we're gonna make all this money
and not at all support the people
who are really building the foundations that we build upon.
- Most of my sponsors are developers.
- Yeah.
So yeah, let's hope it changes.
- Yeah, well, I'll continue to beat that drum,
but let's talk about your project.
So Polars and the RS is for Rust,
I imagine at the end,
but tell us about the name Polars,
like Polar Bear, but Polars.
- Yeah, so I started writing a data from library
and initially it was only for Rust,
was my idea until.
- Until you saw all the people doing data science
and Python, you're like, well,
what can I do for these people, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
And I wanted to give a wink to the Pandas project,
but I wanted a beer that was better, faster,
I don't know, stronger.
So luckily a Panda beer isn't the most frightful beer.
So I had a few to choose,
But the grizzly, yeah, the polar has the RS.
So that's a lucky coincidence.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
Yeah, so the subtitle here is
lightning fast data frame library for Rust and Python.
And you have two APIs that people can use.
We'll get to dive into those.
- Yeah.
- I guess it's worth maybe.
- Correct anymore, I'd say.
I mean, we're, it's just we're written in Rust
And it's a complete different library in Rust
and you can expose it to many frontends.
So you've got DLT already, frontend in Rust,
Python, Node.js, R is coming up
and normal JavaScript is coming up and Ruby.
There is also a Polart and Ruby.
- So interesting.
So for the JavaScript one, are you gonna use WebAssembly?
- Yeah.
- Right, which is pretty straightforward
'cause Rust comes from Mozilla.
WebAssembly, I believe also originated,
they kind of originated as a somewhat tied together store.
- Yeah, so Rust C++ C can compile to WebAssembly.
It's not really straightforward
because the WebAssembly virtual machine
isn't like your normal OS.
So there are a lot of things harder,
but we are working on the challenges there.
- Okay, well, that's pretty interesting,
but for now you got Python and you've got Rust
and that's great.
Let's, I think a lot of people listening,
myself included when I started looking into this,
immediately go to, it's like pandas, but rust.
It's like pandas, but instead of C at the bottom,
it's rust at the bottom.
And that's somewhat true, but mostly not true.
So let's start with you telling us,
how is this like pandas
and how is it different from pandas?
- Yeah, so it's not like Pandas.
I think it's different on two ways.
So we have the API and we have the implementation.
And which one should I start with?
Bottom up?
- Yeah, bottom up, sure.
All right, let's do it.
- So that was my critique from Pandas
and that they didn't start bottom up.
They took whatever was there already,
which work good for that purpose.
And Panda's built on NumPy.
And NumPy is a great library,
but it's built for numerical processing
and not for relational processing.
Relational data is completely different.
You have string data, you have message data,
and this data is currently just put as Python object
in those NumPy arrays.
And if you know anything about memory,
then in this array you have a pointer
with where each Python object is somewhere else.
So if you traverse this memory,
every pointer you hit, you must look it up somewhere else.
That memory is not in cache,
so we have a cache miss,
which is a 200x slowdown per element you traverse.
So this is--
- So for people listening,
what you're saying the 200x slowdown is,
the L1, L2, L3 caches,
which all have different speeds and stuff,
but the caches that are near the CPU
versus main memory, it's like 200 to 400 times slower.
Not paging off a disk or something.
It's really different, right?
It's really a big deal.
- It's a big deal.
It's terribly slow.
It also, Python has a GIL.
It also blocks multi-threading.
If you want to read the string,
you cannot do this from different threads.
If you want to modify the string,
there's only one thread that connects this Python GIL.
And they also didn't take into account
anything from databases.
So databases are basing from the 1950s.
There's been a lot of research in databases
and how we do things fast, how we write a query
and then optimize this query because the user
that uses your library is not the expert.
It doesn't write optimized queries.
No, but we have a lot of information
so we can optimize this query and execute this
in the most, in a very efficient way.
- That's an interesting idea.
- Yeah, but Apondos just executes it
and gives you what you ask.
And what you ask is probably not the best thing.
- Yeah, that's interesting because as programmers,
as when I have my Python hat on,
I want my code to run exactly as I wrote it.
I don't want it to get clever and change it.
If I said do a loop, do a loop.
If I said put it in a dictionary, put it in a dictionary.
But when I write a database query,
be that against Postgres with relational or MongoDB,
there's a query planner.
And the query planner looks at all the different steps.
Should we do the filter first?
Can we use an index?
Can we use a compo?
Which index should we choose?
All of those things, right?
And so what you tell it and what happens,
you don't tell it how to do finding the data,
the database, you just give it,
here's kind of the expressions that I need,
the predicates that I need you to work with.
And then you figure it out, you're smart,
you're the database.
So one of the differences I got from reading
what you've got here so far is it looks like,
I don't know if it goes as far as this database stuff
that we're talking about,
there's a way for it to build up the code it's supposed to run and it can decide things like,
you know, these two things could go in parallel or things along those lines, right?
>> Yeah, yeah. Well, it is actually very similar. It is a vectorized query engine. And you can,
the only thing that doesn't make us a database is that we don't have any, we don't bother with
file structures. >> Right, like the persistence
and transactions and all that?
Yeah, so we have different kinds of databases.
You have OLAP and OLTP, transactional modeling,
which works often on one.
So if you do a REST API query and you modify one user ID,
then you're transactional.
And if you do OLAP, that's more analytical.
And then you do large aggregations of large whole tables.
And then you need to process all the data.
And those different database designs
lead to different query optimizers.
and Polis is focused on Ola. But yeah, we... So, as you described, you've got two ways of
programming things. One is procedural, which Python mostly is. You tell exactly if you want
to get a cup of coffee, how many steps it should take forward, then rotate 90 degrees, take three
steps, then rotate 90 degrees. You can put right down the whole algorithm how to get a coffee,
You could just say, "Get me a coffee and I'd like some sugar," and then let the query engine
decide how to best get it done.
And that's more declarative.
You describe the end result.
And as it turns out, this is also very readable because you declare what you want and the
intent is readable in the query.
And if you're doing more procedural programming,
you describe what you're doing.
And the intent often needs to come from comments,
like what are we trying to do when we follow this out?
- Right, yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
Very interesting.
- That's why, yeah, sorry.
And that's why the, so the first thing is,
we write a database engine, a query engine from scratch,
and really think about multiprocessing,
about caches, also out of core,
we can process data that doesn't fit into memory.
So we really built this from scratch
with all those things in mind.
And then at first we wanted to expose the Pondus API
and then we noticed how bad it was for writing fast data.
The Pondus API just isn't really good
for this declarative analyzing of what the user wants to do.
So we just cut it off and took the freedom
to design an API that makes most sense.
>>That's interesting.
I didn't realize that you had started
trying to be closer to pandas than you ended up.
>>Yeah, well, it was very short-lived, I must say.
>>Yeah, and that's not necessarily saying pandas
are bad, I don't think.
It's approaching the problem differently,
and it has different goals, right?
>>Yeah.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- So maybe we could look at...
Yeah, maybe we could look at an example
of some of the code that we're talking about.
I guess also one of the other differences there is
much of this has to do with what you would call,
I guess you refer to them as lazy APIs or streaming APIs,
kind of like a generator.
- Yeah.
If you think about a join, for instance, in Pandas,
if you would write a join and then take only one to the first 100 rows
of that result, then it would first do the join,
and then that might produce 1 million or 10 million rows.
And then you take only 100 of them, and then you have materialized a million,
but you take only a fraction of that.
And by having that lazy, you can...
you can optimize for the whole query at a time
and just see how we do this join,
but we only need 100 rows.
So that's how we materialize 100 rows.
So it gets more of a holistic approach.
- That's really cool.
I didn't realize it had so many similarities to databases,
but yeah, it makes a lot of sense.
All right, let's look at maybe a super simple example.
You've got on polar.rs.
What country is RS?
I always love how different countries that often have nothing to do with domain names
get grabbed because they have a cool ending like Libya.ly for a while.
It still is, but it was used frequently, like Bitly and stuff.
Do you know what RS is?
I believe it's Serbia.
Serbia.
Okay, cool.
I'm not sure.
Yeah, yeah, very cool.
All right, so polar.rs, like polar.rs.
Over here, you've got on the homepage here, the landing page, and then through the documentation
as well, you've got a lot of places where you're like, "Show me the Rust API or show
me the Python API."
People can come and check out the Rust code.
It's a little bit longer because it's that kind of language, but it's not terribly more
complex.
Maybe talk us through this little example here on the homepage in Python, just to give
give people a sense of what the API looks like.
Yeah, so we start with a scanned CSV, which is a lazy read,
which is--
so a read CSV tells what you do, and then it reads the CSV,
and you get the data frame.
In a scanned CSV, we start a computation graph.
We call this a lazy frame.
A lazy frame is actually just--
it holds-- it remembers the steps of the operations
you want to do, then it sends a boilerplate
that looks at this very plan and optimize it
and it will think of how to execute it.
And we have different engines, so you can have an engine
that's more specialized for data that doesn't fit
into memory and an engine that's more specialized
for data that does fit into memory.
So we start with a scan and then we do a dot filter
and we want to use verbs.
that's the declarative part.
In pandas we often do indexes.
And those indexes are ambiguous in my opinion
because you can pause in a NumPy array with booleans,
but you can also pause in a NumPy array with integers.
So you can do slicing, you can also pause in a NumPy,
a list of strings, and then you do column selection.
So it has three functions.
- One thing that I find really interesting about pandas
is it's so incredible and people who are very good with pandas,
they can just make it fly.
They can make it really right expressions
that are super powerful.
But it's not obvious that you should
have been able to do that before you see it.
There's a lot of not quite magic,
but stuff that doesn't seem to come really straight out
of the API directly.
You pass in some sort of a Boolean expression
that involves a vector and some other test into the brackets.
Like, wait, how did I know I could do that?
Whereas this, your API is a lot more of a fluent API
where you say, you know, instead of PD,
you'd say PL, PL.scan, CSV.filter.groupby.aggregate.collect.
And it kind of just flows together.
Does that mean that the editors and IDEs
can be more helpful suggesting what happens at each step?
- Yes, we are really strict on type.
So we also only return a single type from a method.
And we only, a dot filter just expects a Boolean expression
that produces a Boolean, not an integer, not a string.
So we want our methods to, from reading our code,
you should be able to understand what you're doing. That's really
important to me. It should be unambiguous, it should be
consistent, and you your knowledge of the API should
expand to different parts of the API. Right. And that's where I
think we're going to talk about this later. But that's where
expressions really come in.
Yep. Okay, so I just derailed you a little bit here, as you're
describing this.
So you start out with scanning a CSV,
which is sort of creating and kicking off a data frame
equivalent here.
And then you- - A lazy frame.
- A lazy frame, okay.
And then you say a dot filter and you give it an expression
like this column is greater than five, right?
Or some expression that we would understand in Python.
And that's the filter statement, right?
- Yeah.
Yeah, and then we follow it a group by argument
and then an aggregation where we say,
okay, take all columns and sum them.
And this again is an expression.
These are really easy expressions.
And then we take this lazy frame
and we materialize it into a data frame
that can collect on it.
And collect means, okay, all those steps you recorded,
now you can do your magic, query optimizer,
get all the stuff.
And what this will do here, it will recognize that,
Okay, we've taken the iris.csv, which got different columns.
I know in this case it won't.
So if you would have finished with a select
where we only select a few columns,
it would have recognized,
oh, we don't need all those columns in the csv.
- I see. - So we only take the ones we need.
What it will do, it will push the filter,
the predicate, down to the scan.
So during the reading of the csv,
we will take this predicate.
we say, okay, the sample length is larger than five,
the rows that don't match this predicate
will not be materialized.
So if you have a really large CSV file,
this will really,
let's say you have a CSV file of tens of gigabytes,
but your predicate only selects 5% of that,
then you only materialize 5% of the 10 gigabytes.
- Yeah, so 500 megs instead of 10 gigabytes
or something like that, or 200 megs,
whatever it is, quite a bit less.
That's really interesting.
And this is all part of the benefits
of what we were talking about with the lazy,
lazy frames, lazy APIs,
and building up all of the steps before you say go.
Because in pandas, you would say read CSV.
So, okay, it's gonna read the CSV.
Now what?
Right? - Yes.
- And then you apply your filter
if that's the order you wanna do it in,
and then you group and then, and so on and so on, right?
So this, yeah, it's interesting in that it does allow
more database-like behavior behind the scenes.
- Yeah, yeah.
In the end, in my opinion, the data frame
should be seen as a table in a database.
It's the final view of the computation.
Like you could see it as a materialized view.
We have some data on this,
and we want to get it into another table
which we would feed into our machine learning models
or whatever, and we do a lot of operations on them
before we get there.
So I wouldn't see a data frame as a data,
it's not only a data structure,
it's not only a list or a dictionary.
There are lots of steps before we get into those tables
we eventually need.
- Right.
So here's an interesting challenge.
There's a lot of visualization libraries.
There are a lot of other data science libraries
that know and expect Pandas DataFrames.
So like, okay, what you do is you send me
the Pandas DataFrame here,
or we're going to patch Pandas
that if you call this function on the data frame,
it's going to do this thing.
And they may say, Richie, fantastic job
you've done here in Polars.
But my stuff is already all built around Pandas,
so I'm not going to use this.
But it's worth pointing out there's some cool Pandas
integration, right?
Yeah.
So Polars doesn't want to do plotting.
I don't think it should be in the data frame library.
Maybe another library can do it on top of Polar
if they feel like it.
It shouldn't be in Polar, in my opinion.
But often when you do plotting, you're plotting--
the number of rows will not be billions.
I mean, there's no plotting engine that can deal with that.
So you will be reducing your big data set to something small.
And then you--
>>Victor: There's hardly a monitor
that has enough pixels to show you that in here, right?
So yeah.
>>Jeroen: Right.
So we can call to pandas and then we transform our polars data frame to pandas
and then you can integrate with scikit-learn with and we often find that
progressively rewriting some pandas code into polars already is cheaper than keeping it in
pandas. If you do a if you come from pandas to polars do a join in polars and then back to pandas
we probably made up for those double copies. Pandas does a lot of internal copies if you do a
a reset index, copies all data, if you do, there are a lot of
internal copies and bombers which are implicit. So I
wouldn't worry about an explicit copy in the end of your ETL to
go to plotting when the day right, right, right. So let's
look at the benchmarks, because it sounds like to a large
degree. Even if you do have to do this conversion in the end,
many times, it still might even be quicker.
So you've got some benchmarks over here
and you compared, I'm gonna need some good vision
for this one, you compared Polars, Pandas, Dask,
and then two things which are too small for me to read.
Tell us what you compared.
- Modin and Vax.
- Modin and Vax, okay.
And for people listening, if you go out here
and look at these benchmarks,
if you're linked right off the homepage.
There's like a little tiny purple thing
and a whole bunch of really tall bar graphs
about the rest.
- Yeah.
- And the little tiny thing that you can kind of miss
if you don't look carefully,
that's the time it takes for polars.
And then all the others are up there in like 60 seconds,
a hundred seconds.
And then polars is like quarter of a second.
So, you know, it's easy to miss it in the graph,
But the quick takeaway here, I think,
is this is some fast stuff.
Yeah.
So we're often orders of magnitudes faster than pandas.
So it's not uncommon to hear it's 10 to 20x times faster.
Especially if you write proper pandas and proper polos,
it's probably 20x if we deal with I/O as well.
So what we see here are the TPCH benchmarks.
GPC-H is a database query benchmark standard,
which this is used by every query engine
to show how fast it is.
And those are really hard questions
that really flex the muscles of a query engine.
So you have joins on several tables
with different group bys,
different nested group bys, et cetera.
And yeah, I really tried to make those other tools faster.
So in memory, DOS can mode in,
no, it was really hard to make stuff faster than Pandas,
except for Polar, on a few occasions.
But once we include IO, all those tools first needed
go via pandas and yeah.
What this sort of shows is that we have pandas,
which is a single threaded data frame engine,
and then we have tools that parallelize pandas,
and it's not always,
they don't, just parallelizing pandas
doesn't make it faster.
So if we have a filter
or a element-wise multiplication.
Parallelization is easy.
You just split it up in chunks and do your parallelization.
And then there's tools.
- You got 10 cores, you can start 10 threads
and I can take one 10th of the data
and start to answer yes or no for the filter question,
for example, right?
- Yes.
- Yeah, okay.
- A lot of people don't realize
that a lot of data frame operations
are not embarrassingly parallel.
A group by is definitely not embarrassingly parallel.
a filter or sorry, a join needs a shuffle.
It doesn't, it's not there in parallel.
And that's where, that's why you see those tools
being slower than Pandas because they're string data
and then you have a problem because,
or we need to do multi-processing
and we need to send those Python objects
to another project and we copy data, which is slow,
or we need to do multi-threading and we're bound by the gil
and we're single threaded.
And then there is the expensive structure.
Yeah, I think there's some interesting parallels for Dask and Polars.
On these benchmarks, at least, you're showing much better performance than Dask.
I've had Matthew Rocklin on a couple of times to talk about Dask and some of the work they're doing there.
And it's very cool.
And one of the things that I think Dask is interesting for
is allowing you to scale your code out
to multi-cores on your machine, or even distributed grid
computing, or process data that doesn't fit in memory.
And they can, behind the scenes, juggle all that for you.
So I feel like Polar's kind of has a different way,
but attempts to solve some of those problems as well.
yeah the Polar has full control over it over everything so it's built from the
ground up and it controls the I/O, it controls their own memory, it controls which
thread gets which data and in DOS it goes through it takes this other tool
and then parallelizes that but it is limited by what this other tool also is
But I think, so on a single machine,
it has those challenges.
I think Dask distributed doesn't have these challenges.
And I think for distributed, it can work really well.
- Yeah, the interesting part with Dask, I think,
is that it's kind of like pandas,
but it scales in all these interesting ways.
Across cores, bigger memory, but also across machines,
and then across cores, across machines,
like all that sort of stuff.
I feel like Dask is a little bit,
maybe it's trying to solve a little bit bigger
compute problem, like how can we use a cluster of computers
to answer these questions, whereas I don't get that sense.
- The documentation also says it themselves.
They say that they're probably not faster than Pandas
on a single machine.
So they're more for the large, the big data.
- Yeah.
But Polaris wants to be and a lot faster on a single machine,
but also wants to be able to do out-of-core processing
on a single machine.
We don't support all queries yet,
but we already do basic joins, group by sorts,
predicates, element-wise operations.
And then we can process, I process 500 gigabytes on my laptop.
That's pretty good.
Your laptop probably doesn't have 500 gigs of memory either, does it?
No, no, no, no. It's 16 gigs.
Nice. It's probably actually a value to, as you develop this product, to not have
too massive of a computer to work on. You know, if you had a $5,000 workstation,
you know, you might be a little out of touch with many people using your code and so on.
- Yeah, well, though, I think there,
I think Polars, like scaling on a single machine
makes sense for different reasons as well.
I think a lot of people talk about distributed,
but if you think about the complexity of distributed,
you need to send data,
shuffle data over the network to other machines.
So there are a lot of people using Polars in our Discord
who have one terabyte of RAM and say,
it's cheaper and a lot faster than Spark
because one, Polis is faster on a single machine
and one, two, they have a beefy machine with like 120 cores
and they don't have to go over the network to parallelize.
So I think times are changing.
I think also scaling out data
on a single machine is getting more and more interesting.
- It is.
One of the areas in which it's interesting is GPUs.
Do you have any integration with GPUs
or any of those sorts of things?
- No.
- Not suggesting necessarily is even a good idea.
I'm just wondering if it does.
- No, I get this question,
but I'm not really convinced I can get the data
fast enough into the memory.
we want to process gigabytes of data.
And the challenge already on the CPU
is getting the data from cache, from memory, fast enough.
And I think on a CPU, this is--
I don't know.
Yeah.
So maybe we could talk really quickly about platforms
that it runs on.
This is the very first show that I'm doing on my M2 Pro processor,
which is fun. I literally been using it for like an hour and a half,
so I don't really have much to say, but it looks neat. Anyway, you know,
that's very different than an Intel machine,
which is different than a Raspberry Pi, which is different than, you know,
some version of Linux running on ARM or on AMD.
So where, where do these, you know, what's the,
the reach, like who can use it?
Well, we support it.
We support it.
So Parallels also has a lot of like SIMD optimizations.
SIMD stands for Single Instruction Multiple Data,
where, for instance, if you do a floating point operation
instead of doing a single floating point at a time,
you can fill in those vector lanes
into your CPU, which can fit eight floating points
and in a single operation can compute eight at a time.
And then you have eight times the parallelism on a single core.
Those instructions are only activated for Intel.
So we don't have these instructions activated for ARM,
but we do compile to ARM.
And how it performs, I think it performs fast.
- Yeah, but so if the standard machines, right?
macOS, Windows, Linux, or we're all good to go.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And it ships as a wheel, so you don't have to have any,
you don't have to have Rusty
or anything like that hanging around?
- No, no, no, it ships as a wheel, yeah.
- Okay.
- We also have Conda,
but the Conda is always a bit lagging behind,
so I'd advise to install Compit
because we can pre-control this deployment.
- Yeah, exactly.
You push it out to pipe your eye in.
That's it.
That's what pip sees and it's gonna go, right?
Pretty much instantly.
I guess it's worth pointing out while we're sitting here
is not that thing I highlighted this.
You do have a whole section in your user guide,
the Polars book called "Coming from Pandas"
that actually talks about the differences,
not just how do I do this versus, you know,
this operation in Pandas versus Polars,
but it also talks about some of the philosophy,
like this lazy concepts that we've spoken about
and a query optimization.
I feel like we covered it pretty well,
unless there's maybe some other stuff
that you wanna throw in here really quick,
but I mostly just wanna throw this out as a resource
'cause I know many people are coming from pandas
and they may be interested in this
and this is probably a good place to start.
I'll link to it in the show notes.
- Yeah, I think the most controversial one
that we don't have the multi-index.
- Right, you don't have anything other than zero base,
zero, one, two, three, where is it in the range?
- Yeah, in index, yeah.
Yeah, well, we will support data structures
that make lookups faster, like index in a database sense,
but it will not change the semantics of the query.
That's an important thing.
Yeah, okay.
Yeah, so I encourage people who are mostly pandas people
to come down here and look through this.
It's pretty straightforward.
Another thing that I think is interesting
and we're talking about maybe is we could touch a little bit
on some of the, how can I, in your user guide,
you've got, how can I work with IO?
How can I work with time series?
How can I work with multiprocessing and so on?
What do you think is good to highlight out of here?
Yeah, the user guide is a bit outdated. So, I think it's a year old. So, for instance,
I/O is changing. Polaris writes as its own I/O readers. So, we've written our
our own CSV reader, JSON reader, Parquet, IPC, Arrow,
and that's all in our control.
But for interaction with databases,
it's often a bit more complicated.
You deal with different drivers, different ways,
and currently we do this with Connector X,
which is really great and allows us to read
from a lot of different databases,
but it doesn't allow us to write from databases yet.
And this is happening, this is not changing.
I want to explain a bit why.
So Polaris builds upon the arrow memory specification.
And the arrow memory specification is sort of standard
of how memory for data,
our memory for columnar data should look into
how columnar data should be represented in memory.
And this is becoming a new standard.
And Spark is using it, Dremel,
Pandas itself, for instance, if you read a parquet in Pandas,
it reads in first into error memory
and then copies that into Pandas memory.
So the arrow memory specification
becoming a standard, and this is a way to share data
to processes, also to other libraries within the process
without copying data.
We can just swap our pointers
if we know that we both support arrow.
- Oh, so arrow defines basically in memory,
it looks like this.
And so...
And if you both agree on that, we can just swap our pointers.
- Right, because a .NET object, a C++ object,
and a Python object, those don't look like anything similar
to any of them, right, in memory.
And yeah, so this is from the Apache Arrow project, yeah?
- Yeah, and this is really, really used
by a lot of different tools already.
And currently there is coming the ADBC,
which is the Apache Arrow database connector,
which will solve all those problems
because then we can read and write
from a lot of databases in Arrow
and then it will be really fast
and really easy for us to do.
So luckily, that's one of those foundations of Polars
I'm really happy about because supporting Arrow
and using Arrow memory gives us a lot of interaction
interval with other libraries.
- Right.
Yeah, that's interesting.
When you think of pandas,
it's kind of built on top of NumPy as its core foundation
and it can exchange NumPy arrays
with other things that do that.
And so Apache Arrow is kind of your base there, right?
- Yeah, well, it's kind of full circle
because Apache Arrow is started by Wes McKinney.
Wes McKinney being the creator of Pandas.
And when he got out of Pandas,
he thought, okay, the memory representation of NumPy
is just not, we should not use it.
And then he was inspired to build Apache Arrow,
which learned from Pandas and yeah.
Also, that's how you learn about these projects, right?
This is how you realize, oh, we had put this thing in place.
Maybe it would work better, right?
You work on a project for five years
and you're like, if I got a chance to start over,
but it's too late now, but every now and then
you do actually get a chance to start over.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Interesting.
I didn't realize that Wes was involved with both.
I mean, I knew from Pandas,
but I didn't realize he's working on Arrow.
Yeah, he is CTO of Fultron, which, no, he started Apache Arrow.
And that's, Apache Arrow is sort of super big, like used everywhere, but sort of middleware.
Like it's end users are developers and not, end users are developers who build tools and
not developers who use libraries.
You might not even know that you're using it.
I just use pullers and oh, by the way,
it happens to internally be better because of this.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, very cool.
Okay, let's see.
We've got a little bit of time left to talk about it.
So for example, some of these, how can I,
let me just touch on a couple that are nice here.
So you talked about ConnectorX,
you talked about the database,
but it's like three lines of code
to define a connection string,
define a SQL query,
and then just, you can just say PL.readSQL.
And there you go.
You've, you call it data frame
or what do you call the thing you get back here?
- A data frame.
- Data frame, okay.
- So reading is always a data frame,
scanning will be a lazy frame.
- Got it, okay.
Is there a scan SQL as well?
- No, this might happen in the future.
The challenge is, are we going to push back our optimizations?
So we write a policy query, and then we
must translate that into the SQL we send to the database.
But that needs to be consistent over different databases.
That's a whole other rabbit hole we might get into.
I'm not sure.
Because you can already do many of these operations
in the SQL query that you're sending over, right?
You have sort of two layers of query engines and optimizers
and query plans.
And it's not like you can't add on additional filters, joins,
sorts, and so on before it ever gets back to you, right?
But it would be terrible if someone writes
SELECT * FROM TABLE and then writes the filters in POLARS
and then the database has sent all those data over the network.
So, yeah, ideally, we'd be able to push those predicates down into the SQL.
Yeah, but you know somebody's going to do it because they're more comfortable writing
Polar API in Python than they are writing T-SQL.
Yeah, yeah. You will not, yeah.
It is not ideal.
It's not optimal. That's right. That is right.
Let's see what else can you do here.
So we've already talked about the CSV files
and this is the part of that I was talking about
where you've got the toggle to see the Rust code
and the Python code.
So I think people might appreciate that.
Parquet files.
So Parquet files is a more efficient format.
Maybe talk about using Parquet files versus CSV
and why you might wanna get rid of CSV
and like store these intermediate files
and then load them when you, yeah.
- So Parthos is a really fast CSV reader.
I really did my best on that one.
But if you can use Parquet or Arrow IPC
because your data is typed,
there's no ambiguity on reading.
We know which type it is.
- Right, because CSV files,
even though it might be representing a date,
it's still a string and a substring.
Yeah, it's slow to parse.
Yeah, exactly.
- There's also, we can just,
so it, Parquet interacts really nicely
with query optimization.
So we can select just a single column from the file
without touching any of the other columns.
We can read statistics and,
so Parquet file can write statistics,
which knows, okay, this page has got this maximum value,
this minimum value.
And if you have written a POTUS query,
which says also only gives me the result
where the value is larger than this.
And we see that the statistics say
it cannot be in this file.
We can just skip the whole column.
We don't have to read. - Oh, interesting.
Oh, okay. - Yeah.
So there are a lot of optimizations.
So the best work is work you don't have to do.
- Exactly.
Or you've done it when you created the file
and you never do it again or something like that.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so you've got a read parquet, a scan parquet,
I suppose that's the data frame versus lazy frame.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, and then you also have the ability to write them.
That's pretty interesting.
JSON, multiple files.
It's just a whole bunch of how do I, how can I rather,
but a bunch of neat things.
What else would you like to highlight here
in the next couple of minutes?
- I think the most important thing I want to touch on
is the expression API.
So that's a bit, if you go a bit higher.
So just follow up.
- I see, there you go.
- They got their own chapter.
So one of the goals of the Polar's API
is to keep the API service small,
but give you a lot of things you can do.
And this is where the Polis expressions come in.
So Polis expressions are expressions of what you want to do,
which are run and parallelized on a query engine.
And you can combine them indefinitely.
So an expression takes a series and produces a series.
And because the input is the same as the output,
you can combine them.
And as you can see, we can do pretty complicated stuff
and you can keep chaining them.
And this is the same like,
how I'd like to see it.
For instance, the Python vocabulary is quite small.
So we have a while, we have a loop,
we have a variable assignment.
But if you, I think it fits into maybe two pieces of paper.
But with this, you can write any program you want
with the combination of all those,
all those, yeah, this vocabulary.
And that's what we want to do
with the Polar Expressions as well.
So you've got a lot of small building blocks
which can be combined into, yeah, anything.
- Yeah, so somebody could say,
I wanna select a column back,
but then I don't want the actual values.
I want the unique ones, a uniqueness.
So if there's duplicate, remove those,
and then you can do a .account.
Then you can add an alias, which gives it a new,
which basically defines the column name.
And it's not names, it's some other word.
- You could read it as an ads.
So take column names as unique names to in SQL.
- Yeah.
a keyword and five, so in other words--
>> Right.
It means something else, yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Interesting.
OK.
Yeah, so people--
>> That's pretty good.
>> They use these expressions to do lots of transformations
and filtering and things like that.
>> Yeah.
>> It's very powerful.
So these expressions can be used in a select
on different places, but the knowledge of expressions
extrapolates to different locations.
You can do it in a select statement,
and then you select this expression,
and you get a result.
You can also do this in a group by aggregation.
And then the same logic applies.
It runs on the same engine,
and we make sure everything is consistent.
This is really powerful
because it's so expressive,
people don't have to use
custom apply with a lambda because when you use a lambda it's a black box to us
it will be slow because it's python and we don't know what happens
so a lambda is it will be slow it will kill parallelization because gills block
um yeah a lambda is three times bad for us right yeah it it gets in the way of a lot of your
optimizations and a lot of your speed ups there. Yeah and that's why we want to
make this expression API very complete so you don't need them as much. Yeah so people are
wanting to get this get seriously into this they should check out chapter three expressions right
and just go through there. Yeah. Probably especially you know sort of browse through the
Python examples that they can see where go back and see what they need to learn more about but
Yeah, it's
It's a very interesting api
The speed is very
compelling
I think I think it's a cool project
Like I said, how many people we got here?
13 000 people using already. So that's a pretty big community
Yeah
Thanks
Join us.
Yeah, so if you're interested in the project,
we have a Discord where you can chat with us
and ask questions and see how you can best do things.
It's pretty easy.
- Cool, the Discord's linked right off the homepage,
so that's awesome.
People can find it there.
Contributions, people wanna make contributions.
I'm sure you're willing to accept PRs and other feedback.
Welcome. Before you put in a really large PR, please first open an issue with a...
To start the discussion, this contribution is welcome. And we also have a few getting
started, good for beginners, good for new contributors.
- Okay, yes, you've tagged or labeled some of the issues
as look here if you wanna get into this, yeah?
- Yeah, I must say, I think we're an interesting project
to contribute to because we're,
you can, it's not everything is set in stone.
So there are still places where you can
Clay, I'm not sure.
- There's still interesting work to be done.
It's not completely 100% polished and finalized.
- Yeah, yeah.
On the periphery, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, very cool.
All right, well, let's wrap it up
with a comment from the audience here.
Ajit says, "Excellent content, guys.
"It certainly helps me kickstart my journey
from pandas to pollers.
Awesome, awesome.
Glad to help.
I'm sure it will help many people do that.
So Richie, let's close it out with final call to action.
People are interested in this project.
They want to start playing and learning pollers.
Maybe try it out on some of their code
that is pandas at the moment.
What do they do?
I'd recommend, if you have a new project,
just start in Pollard Arsenal.
because you can also rewrite some pomdes,
but the most fun experience will just start a new project
in Polars because then you can really enjoy
what Polars offers.
Learn the expression API,
learn how you use it declaratively,
and yeah,
then it will be most fun.
- Absolutely, sounds great.
And like we did point out,
It has the to and from pandas data frame.
So you could work on a section of your code
and still have it consistent, right?
With other parts that have to be in this.
- Yeah, you can progressively rewrite
some performance heavy parts.
I also think it's,
so Polymer is really strict on the schema, on the types.
It's also, if you write any ETL,
you will be really happy to do that in Polaris
because you can check the schema of a laser frame
before executing it.
And then you know the D types before running the query.
And if the data comes in and it doesn't apply
to this schema, you can fill fast
and instead of having strange outputs.
- Oh, that's interesting because you definitely don't want
zero when you expected something else
because it couldn't parse or other weird,
you know, whatever, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So this was my, so missing data in Polars
doesn't change the schema.
So Polars is really, the schema is defined
by the operations and the data
and not by the values in the data.
So you can statically check your code.
- Excellent.
All right, well, congratulations on a cool project.
I'm glad we got to share with everybody.
Thanks for coming on the show.
- Yeah, thanks for having me.
- You bet, bye.
- Bye.